Express tutorial - add parallel glitch deployment path (#30945)
mdn/content: files/en-us/learn/server-side/express_nodejs/deployment/index.md

The good news when you're starting out is that there are quite a few sites that provide "free" computing environments that are intended for evaluation and testing.
These are usually fairly resource constrained/limited environments, and you do need to be aware that they may expire after some introductory period or have other constraints.
They are however great for testing low-traffic sites in a hosted environment, and can provide an easy migration to paying for more resources when your site gets busier.

> Popular choices in this category include [Glitch](https://glitch.com/), [Python Anywhere](https://www.pythonanywhere.com/), [Amazon Web Services](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/awsaccountbilling/latest/aboutv2/billing-free-tier.html), [Microsoft Azure](https://azure.microsoft.com/pricing/details/app-service/), etc

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Popular choices in this category include [Glitch](https://glitch.com/), [Python Anywhere](https://www.pythonanywhere.com/), [Amazon Web Services](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/awsaccountbilling/latest/aboutv2/billing-free-tier.html), [Microsoft Azure](https://azure.microsoft.com/pricing/details/app-service/), etc.
```

> You don't need to know anything else for this tutorial, but you can find out more about options for deploying node applications in [Nixpacks Node](https://nixpacks.com/docs/providers/node).

Once the application is running it can configure itself using information provided in [environment variables](https://docs.railway.app/develop/variables).
For example, an application that uses a database must get the address using a variable.
The database service itself may be hosted by Railway or some other provider.

Developers interact with Railway through the Railway site, and using a special [Command Line Interface (CLI)](https://docs.railway.app/develop/cli) tool.
The CLI allows you to associate a local GitHub repository with a railway project, upload the repository from the local branch to the live site, inspect the logs of the running process, set and get configuration variables and much more.
One of the most useful features is that you can use the CLI to run your local project with the same environment variables as the live project.

> That's all the overview you need to deploy the app to Railway.

Author: ```suggestion
That's all the overview you need to deploy the app to Railway.
Next we will set up a Railway account, install our website and a database, and try out the Railway client.
```

When this operation completes, you should be able to go back to the page on GitHub where you created your repo, refresh the page, and see that your whole application has now been uploaded. You can continue to update your repo as files change using this add/commit/push cycle.

This is a good point to make a backup of your "vanilla" project — while some of the changes we're going to be making in the following sections might be useful for deployment on any hosting service (or for development) others might not.
You can do this using `git` on the command line:

```bash
# Create branch vanilla_deployment from the current branch (main)
git checkout -b vanilla_deployment

> # Push the new branch to Github

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Push the new branch to GitHub
```

  Not having to worry about servers, load balancers, reverse proxies, and so on, makes it much easier to get started.
- The skills and concepts you will learn when using Glitch are transferrable.
- The service and plan limitations do not really impact us using Glitch for the tutorial.
  For example:

  - The starter plan only offers 1000 "project hours" per month, which is reset monthly.
    This is used when you're actively editing the site or if someone is accessing it.
    If no one is accessing or editing the site it will sleep.
  - The starter plan environment has a limited amount of container RAM and storage space.
    There is more than enough for the tutorial, in particular because our database is hosted elsewhere.
  - Custom domains are not well supported (at time of writing).
  - Other limitations can be found in the [Glitch technical restrictions page](https://help.glitch.com/hc/en-us/articles/16287495313293-Technical-Restrictions).

While Glitch is appropriate for hosting this demonstration, you should take the time to determine if it is [suitable for your own website](#choosing_a_hosting_provider).

### How does Glitch work?

> Glitch provides a web based interface in which you can create projects from starter templates, or import them from Github, and then add and edit the project files.
> As you make changes, the project is built and run in its own isolated and independent virtualized container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Glitch provides a web-based interface in which you can create projects from starter templates, or import them from GitHub, and then add and edit the project files.
As you make changes, the project is built and run in its own isolated and independent virtualized container.
```

> How this all works "under the hood" is a mystery — Glitch doesn't say.
> What is clear is that as long as you create a fairly standard nodejs web application (for example using `package.json` for your dependencies), and don't consume more resources than listed in the [technical restrictions](https://help.glitch.com/hc/en-us/articles/16287495313293-Technical-Restrictions), your application should "just work".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How this all works "under the hood" is a mystery — Glitch doesn't say.
What is clear is that as long as you create a fairly standard nodejs web application (for example, using `package.json` for your dependencies), and don't consume more resources than listed in the [technical restrictions](https://help.glitch.com/hc/en-us/articles/16287495313293-Technical-Restrictions), your application should "just work".
```

> Once the application is running it can be configured for production using [private data](https://help.glitch.com/hc/en-us/articles/16287550167437-Adding-Private-Data) supplied in an a `.env` file.
> The values in the secret data are read by the application as environment variables, which as you will recall from a previous section, is how we configured our application to get its database URL.
> Note that the variables are _secret_: the `.env` should not be included in your Github repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the application is running, it can be configured for production using [private data](https://help.glitch.com/hc/en-us/articles/16287550167437-Adding-Private-Data) supplied in a `.env` file.
The values in the secret data are read by the application as environment variables, which, as you will recall from a previous section, is how we configured our application to get its database URL.
Note that the variables are _secret_: the `.env` should not be included in your GitHub repository.
```

The Glitch editing view also provides _terminal_ access to the web app environment, which you can use to work with the web app as though it was running on your local machine.

> That's all the overview you need in order to get started.
> Next we will set up a Glitch account, upload the Library project from Github, and connect to a database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's all the overview you need to get started.
Next, we will set up a Glitch account, upload the Library project from Github, and connect it to a database.
```

### Get a Glitch account

To start using Glitch you will first need to create an account:

- Go to [glitch.com](https://glitch.com) and click the **Sign up** button in the top toolbar.
- Select GitHub in the popup to sign up using your GitHub credentials.
- You'll then be logged in to the Glitch dashboard: <https://glitch.com/dashboard>.

### Deploy on Glitch from GitHub

Next we'll import the Library project from GitHub.
First choose the **Dashboard** option from the site top menu, then select the **New project** button.

> Glitch will display a list of options for the new project, select **Import from GithHub**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Glitch will display a list of options for the new project; select **Import from GitHub**.
```

> ![Glitch website dashboard showing new project button and popup menu with "Import from Github" option](glitch_new_project_import_github.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Glitch website dashboard showing a new project button and a popup menu with "Import from GitHub" option](glitch_new_project_import_github.png)
```

> A popup will appear.
> Enter the URL of your Github library repository into the popup and press **OK**.
> Below you can see we have entered the repo for the worked project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A popup will appear.
Enter the URL of your GitHub library repository into the popup and press **OK**.
Below, we have entered the repo for the worked project.
```

![Glitch popup for entering URL of GitHub repo to import](glitch_new_project_github_repo_url.png)

> Glitch will then import the project, displaying notifications of progress.
> On completion it will display the editing view for the new project, as shown below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Glitch will then import the project, displaying notifications of progress.
Upon completion, it will display the editing view for the new project, as shown below.
```

![Glitch editor view for imported project](glitch_imported_project_in_editor.png)

> You can get the URL of the live site by selecting the **Share** button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can get the live site URL by selecting the **Share** button.
```

![Glitch editor view for imported project](glitch_share_project.png)

Open a new browser tab and copy the link for the live site into the address bar.
The local library site should open and display data from the development database.

> **Note:** This process was a one-off import from GitHub.
> You can also use GitHub actions such as [glitch-project-sync](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/glitch-project-sync) to keep Glitch and > your project synchronized.

> ### Use a Production MongoDB database

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Use a production MongoDB database
```

> You should set up a different database for production than development.
> While Glitch only hosts SQLite databases (and we are set up to use PostGres), there are many sites that provide free (and paid) MongoDb databases as a service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should set up a different database for production than development.
While Glitch only hosts SQLite databases (and we are set up to use Postgres), many sites provide free (or paid) MongoDB databases as a service.
```

Author: Modified this a bit, but good suggestion. ^^^

One option is to follow the [Setting up the MongoDB database](/en-US/docs/Learn/Server-side/Express_Nodejs/mongoose#setting_up_the_mongodb_database) instructions from earlier in the tutorial to set up a new production database.

To make the production database accessible to the library application, open the `.env` file in the editor view for the project.
Enter the database URL variable `MONGODB_URI` and the URL of your production database.
The site updates as you enter values into the editor.

![Glitch .env file editor for private data with production variables](glitch_env.png)

> **Note:** We didn't create this file.
> It is intended for [private data](https://help.glitch.com/hc/en-us/articles/16287550167437-Adding-Private-Data) and was created automatically on import to Glitch.
> It is never exported or copied.

### Other configuration variables

> You will recall from a preceding section that we need to [set NODE_ENV to 'production'](#node_env) in order to improve our performance and generate less-verbose error messages. We do this in the same file as we set the `MONGODB_URI` variable.
> 
> Open `.env` and add a `NODE_ENV` variable with value `production` (see the screenshot in the previous section).
> 
> The local library application is now setup and configured for production use.
> You can add data through the website interface and it should work in the same way that it did during development (though with less debug information exposed for invalid pages).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will recall from a preceding section that we need to [set NODE_ENV to 'production'](#node_env) in order to improve our performance and generate less-verbose error messages. We do this in the same file as we set the `MONGODB_URI` variable.

Open `.env` and add a `NODE_ENV` variable with value `production` (see the screenshot in the previous section).

The local library application is now set up and configured for production use.
You can add data through the website interface, and it should work as it did during development (though with less debug information exposed for invalid pages).
```

> > **Note:** If you just want to add some data for testing you might use the `populatedb` script (with your MongoDB production database URL) as discussed in the section [Express Tutorial Part 3: Using a Database (with Mongoose) Testing — create some items](/en-US/docs/Learn/Server-side/Express_Nodejs/mongoose#testing_%E2%80%94_create_some_items).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** If you only want to add some data for testing, you might use the `populatedb` script (with your MongoDB production database URL) as discussed in the section [Express Tutorial Part 3: Using a Database (with Mongoose) Testing — create some items](/en-US/docs/Learn/Server-side/Express_Nodejs/mongoose#testing_%E2%80%94_create_some_items).
```

  You can use this to run commands and tools in the environment.
  For example, you might use `node -v` to check the node version.
- Interactive debugging in VSCode using the _GLITCH extension for VSCode_.

## Example: Hosting on Railway

This section provides a practical demonstration of how to install _LocalLibrary_ on [Railway](https://railway.app/).

### Why Railway?

> **Warning:** Railway no longer has a completely free starter tier.
> We've kept these instructions because Railway has some great features, and will be a better option for some users.

Railway is an attractive hosting option for several reasons:

- Railway takes care of most of the infrastructure so you don't have to.
  Not having to worry about servers, load balancers, reverse proxies, and so on, makes it much easier to get started.
- Railway has a [focus on developer experience for development and deployment](https://docs.railway.app/reference/compare-to-heroku), which leads to a faster and softer learning curve than many other alternatives.
- The skills and concepts you will learn when using Railway are transferrable.

>   While Railway has some excellent new features, many of the same ideas and approaches are used by other popular hosting services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  While Railway has some excellent new features, other popular hosting services use many of the same ideas and approaches.
```

- [Railway documentation](https://docs.railway.app/) is clear and complete.
- The service appears to be very reliable, and if you end up loving it, the pricing is predictable, and scaling your app is very easy.

You should take the time to determine if Railway is [suitable for your own website](#choosing_a_hosting_provider).

### How does Railway work?

Web applications are each run in their own isolated and independent virtualized container.

> In order to execute your application, Railway needs to be able to set up the appropriate environment and dependencies, and also understand how it is launched.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To execute your application, Railway needs to be able to set up the appropriate environment and dependencies, and also understand how it is launched.
```

> Railway makes this easy, as it is able to automatically recognize and install many different web application frameworks and environments based on their use of "common conventions".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Railway makes this easy, as it can automatically recognize and install many different web application frameworks and environments based on their use of "common conventions".
```

> **Note:** Railway uses [Nixpacks](https://nixpacks.com/docs/) to recognize various web application frameworks written in different programming languages.
> You don't need to know anything else for this tutorial, but you can find out more about options for deploying node applications in [Nixpacks Node](https://nixpacks.com/docs/providers/node).

Once the application is running it can configure itself using information provided in [environment variables](https://docs.railway.app/develop/variables).
For example, an application that uses a database must get the address using a variable.
The database service itself may be hosted by Railway or some other provider.

Developers interact with Railway through the Railway site, and using a special [Command Line Interface (CLI)](https://docs.railway.app/develop/cli) tool.
The CLI allows you to associate a local GitHub repository with a railway project, upload the repository from the local branch to the live site, inspect the logs of the running process, set and get configuration variables and much more.

> One of the most useful features is that you can use the CLI to run your local project with the same environment variables as the live project.
> 
> In order to get our application to work on Railway, we'll need to put our Express web application into a git repository and make a few minor modifications.
> Once we've done that, we can set up a Railway account, install our website and a database, and also try out the Railway client.

Author: ```suggestion
One of the most useful features is that you can use the CLI to run your local project with the same environment variables as the live project.
```

> In order to get our application to work on Railway, we'll need to put our Express web application into a git repository and make a few minor modifications.
> Once we've done that, we can set up a Railway account, install our website and a database, and also try out the Railway client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get our application to work on Railway, we'll need to put our Express web application into a git repository and make a few minor modifications.
Once we've done that, we can set up a Railway account, install our website and a database, and try out the Railway client.
```

Author: Actually we don't need to do the github thing now. I'll reword.

> That's all the overview you need in order to deploy the app to railway.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's all the overview you need to deploy the app to Railway.
```
